README.md, before:

# ggCaller: a gene caller for Bifrost graphs

Traverses Bifrost graphs constructed from bacterial genomes to identify putative protein coding sequences, known as open reading frames (ORFs).

## Installation

### Installation via conda (recommended)

Install through [bioconda](http://bioconda.github.io/):

```conda install ggcaller```

If conda is not installed, first install [miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html), then add the correct channels:

```
conda config --add channels defaults
conda config --add channels bioconda
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```

### Installation from source

Requirements:
-   ```python3```
-   ```biopython```
-   ```SeQan3```
-   ```bifrost```
-   ```pybind11```
-   ```cmake```
-   ```openMP```
-   ```pthreads```
-   a C++17 compiler (e.g. gcc >=7.3)

```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/samhorsfield96/ggCaller 
python setup.py install
```

## Input files for ggCaller

ggCaller can take a list of fasta files (one file per line), or a Bifrost GFA file and Bifrost Colours file generated by ```Bifrost build```. See the Bifrost repository for installation (https://github.com/pmelsted/bifrost).

## Usage

To run ggCaller from the command line, pass arguments specifying input/output and parameters for traversal.

#### If Bifrost GFA and Colours file already exist:

To run ggCaller using an existing Bifrost GFA file and Colours file, specify BOTH:
- ```--graph <graph.gfa>``` Input GFA
- ```--colours <colours.bfg_colors>``` Input colours file

Note: Ensure the sequences used to build the graph are in the same directories as when the graph was built. If the sequences you used to generate the GFA and Colours files were exclusively assembled genomes, additionally specify:
- ```--is-ref```

#### If Bifrost GFA and Colours file do not exist:

To build a new Bifrost graph using assembled genomes and/or reads, specify ONE OR BOTH:
- ```--refs <refs.txt>``` Input GFA
- ```--reads <reads.txt>``` Input colours file

Note: Ensure assembled genome files are exclusively passed to the ```--refs``` argument, and read files exclusively to the ```--reads```
argument. Bifrost uses kmer coverage filtering for read files to remove read errors, but does not do this for assembled genomes.

#### Additional arguments
- ```--kmer``` k-mer size for graph building. Only used for building of new graphs (default: 31 bp)
- ```--path``` maximum path length for traversal in base-pairs (default: 10000 bp)
- ```--orf``` minimum ORF length in base-pairs (default: 90 bp)
- ```--codons``` JSON file specifying START and STOP codons. See ```codons.json``` for example of format.
- ```--no-write-idx``` Don't write FMIndexes to file, otherwise in same directory as fasta files.
- ```--no-write-graph``` Don't write Bifrost GFA or Colours to file, otherwise in working directory.
- ```--repeat``` Enables traversal of nodes more than once, to detect genes with repeats.
- ```--threads``` Number of threads (default: 1)
- ```--out``` output file in FASTA format (default: 'calls.fasta')

## Examples
- Build graph using assembled genomes, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --refs refs.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Build graph using reads, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --reads reads.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Build graph using assembled genomes and reads, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --refs refs.txt --reads reads.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Use existing graph which was built using assembled genomes only.

```ggcaller --graph graph.gfa --colours colours.bfg_colours --is-ref --out calls.fasta```

- Use existing graph which was built using reads or assembled genomes and reads.

```ggcaller --graph graph.gfa --colours colours.bfg_colours --out calls.fasta```

Test data is available in the ```data``` directory.

## Interpreting output FASTA

The output ```calls.fasta``` contains ORF sequences. Headers start with a unique ORF identifier (e.g. 1, 2, 3), followed by the strand of the ORF (+/-), and a colours array (e.g. 11100). The colours array describes the presence/absence of the ORF in the source genomes in the same order as they are passed in the ```refs.txt```/```reads.txt``` files. If both refs and reads are passed, then the ordering is reads followed by refs.

```
>1_+_11100
TTGTCATTTTATTGGTTTATTTTCTTAGCTTTGTTAGAGAGACAGAACTTGAACGTTCTTCTAG
>2_+_00111
ATGGGATTAATGCTGTCTTTATGGGTGTTGGTGGCAGTTTTGATGTATTATCAGGACACATTAAACGAGCTCCATTATGGATGCAAAAATTGA
>3_-_11100
TTGTTCAAAGGTGGTGTTACGATTTCAAGAACTCCTCTCAGTTCTGAGGACACGGTAATGATTGATGCGATAG
```

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite:

Bifrost: 
Holley G., Melsted, P. Bifrost – Highly parallel construction and indexing of colored and compacted de Bruijn graphs. (2019) bioRxiv 695338. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/695338

SeQan3: 
Reinert, K. et al. The SeqAn C++ template library for efficient sequence analysis: A resource for programmers. (2017) Journal of biotechnology, 261, 157-168 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.07.017

Commit message:

Updates README.md with details on how FMindexing removes artificially generated sequences.
Former-commit-id: ecfc3d3bdceafeebc6d87c93cbf5295136058bb6

README.md, after:

# ggCaller: a gene caller for Bifrost graphs

Traverses Bifrost graphs constructed from bacterial genomes to identify putative protein coding sequences, known as open reading frames (ORFs).

## Installation

### Installation via conda (recommended)

Install through [bioconda](http://bioconda.github.io/):

```conda install ggcaller```

If conda is not installed, first install [miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html), then add the correct channels:

```
conda config --add channels defaults
conda config --add channels bioconda
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```

### Installation from source

Requirements:
-   ```python3```
-   ```biopython```
-   ```SeQan3```
-   ```bifrost```
-   ```pybind11```
-   ```cmake```
-   ```openMP```
-   ```pthreads```
-   a C++17 compiler (e.g. gcc >=7.3)

```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/samhorsfield96/ggCaller 
python setup.py install
```

## Input files for ggCaller

ggCaller can take a list of fasta files (one file per line), or a Bifrost GFA file and Bifrost Colours file generated by ```Bifrost build```. See the Bifrost repository for installation (https://github.com/pmelsted/bifrost).

## Usage

To run ggCaller from the command line, pass arguments specifying input/output and parameters for traversal.

ggCaller additionally employs FMindexing to remove artificial sequences generated by incorrectly phased nodes in the DBG. This is only employed when the input sequences are exclusively assembled genomes. 

#### If Bifrost GFA and Colours file already exist:

To run ggCaller using an existing Bifrost GFA file and Colours file, specify BOTH:
- ```--graph <graph.gfa>``` Input GFA
- ```--colours <colours.bfg_colors>``` Input colours file

To enable filtering of artificially generated sequences via FMindexing (if sequences used to generate the GFA and Colours files were exclusively assembled genomes), additionally specify:
- ```--is-ref```

Note: Ensure the sequences used to build the graph are in the same directories as when the graph was built.

#### If Bifrost GFA and Colours file do not exist:

To build a new Bifrost graph using assembled genomes and/or reads, specify ONE OR BOTH:
- ```--refs <refs.txt>``` Input GFA
- ```--reads <reads.txt>``` Input colours file

Note: Ensure assembled genome files are exclusively passed to the ```--refs``` argument, and read files exclusively to the ```--reads```
argument. Bifrost uses kmer coverage filtering for read files to remove read errors, but does not do this for assembled genomes.

#### Additional arguments
- ```--kmer``` k-mer size for graph building. Only used for building of new graphs (default: 31 bp)
- ```--path``` maximum path length for traversal in base-pairs (default: 10000 bp)
- ```--orf``` minimum ORF length in base-pairs (default: 90 bp)
- ```--codons``` JSON file specifying START and STOP codons. See ```codons.json``` for example of format.
- ```--no-write-idx``` Don't write FMIndexes to file, otherwise in same directory as fasta files.
- ```--no-write-graph``` Don't write Bifrost GFA or Colours to file, otherwise in working directory.
- ```--repeat``` Enables traversal of nodes more than once, to detect genes with repeats.
- ```--threads``` Number of threads (default: 1)
- ```--out``` output file in FASTA format (default: 'calls.fasta')

## Examples
- Build graph using assembled genomes, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --refs refs.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Build graph using reads, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --reads reads.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Build graph using assembled genomes and reads, using kmer size of 31 bp. 

```ggcaller --refs refs.txt --reads reads.txt --kmer 31 --out calls.fasta```

- Use existing graph which was built using assembled genomes only.

```ggcaller --graph graph.gfa --colours colours.bfg_colours --is-ref --out calls.fasta```

- Use existing graph which was built using reads or assembled genomes and reads.

```ggcaller --graph graph.gfa --colours colours.bfg_colours --out calls.fasta```

Test data is available in the ```data``` directory.

## Interpreting output FASTA

The output ```calls.fasta``` contains ORF sequences. Headers start with a unique ORF identifier (e.g. 1, 2, 3), followed by the strand of the ORF (+/-), and a colours array (e.g. 11100). The colours array describes the presence/absence of the ORF in the source genomes in the same order as they are passed in the ```refs.txt```/```reads.txt``` files. If both refs and reads are passed, then the ordering is reads followed by refs.

```
>1_+_11100
TTGTCATTTTATTGGTTTATTTTCTTAGCTTTGTTAGAGAGACAGAACTTGAACGTTCTTCTAG
>2_+_00111
ATGGGATTAATGCTGTCTTTATGGGTGTTGGTGGCAGTTTTGATGTATTATCAGGACACATTAAACGAGCTCCATTATGGATGCAAAAATTGA
>3_-_11100
TTGTTCAAAGGTGGTGTTACGATTTCAAGAACTCCTCTCAGTTCTGAGGACACGGTAATGATTGATGCGATAG
```

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite:

Bifrost: 
Holley G., Melsted, P. Bifrost – Highly parallel construction and indexing of colored and compacted de Bruijn graphs. (2019) bioRxiv 695338. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/695338

SeQan3: 
Reinert, K. et al. The SeqAn C++ template library for efficient sequence analysis: A resource for programmers. (2017) Journal of biotechnology, 261, 157-168 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.07.017
